# Noria Client
<sub>Updated 11-29-2021, justin@</sub>

The Noria Client is located in the [noria-client directory.](../../noria-client)

The Noria Client is a robust and versatile library to manage user interaction
with a **system that includes noria** and possibly another database. It is the
primary way to manage interaction with the noria server, as seen in the diagram
on the main client and connections [page](./clients.md). An end user application
should use the Noria Client to interact with the noria server. The Noria Client
in turn interacts with a noria server instance through a `ControllerHandle`
(also known as the `noria/noria` bindings.) The Noria Client is NOT the same as
the `ControllerHandle`.

## Backend Struct

The main struct of the Noria Client is the `Backend` struct. This is a large
struct that contains information about reading/writing, RYW consistency, and
other settings for the client.

The `Backend` struct also contains three important async methods `query()`,
`prepare()` and `execute()`, which all take string SQL queries. In the simplest
case, one should only really need to interact with the Noria Client through
these 3 methods, similar to how one would interact with a normal MySQL database.
Depending on how the `Backend` was configured, the Noria Client will parse the
queries and interact accordingly with noria and/or an underlying database. This
is abstracted away from the user when they are working with the client after
setting it up.

## Initialization / Setup

A `Backend` is created using a `BackendBuilder`. [Here is an
example](../../noria-client/examples/ryw.rs). The most notable settings are:

- **Reader**: specify how the Noria Client should handle read queries (SELECTs).
  Currently, this should always be a `ControllerHandle` used to directly
  interact with Noria.
- **Writer**: specify how the Noria Client should handle write queries (UPDATE,
  INSERT, etc and schema change queries). In most cases, this will be a
  `Writer::MySqlConnector`. In the future, other types of user databases will be
  supported, like Postgres. A `Writer::NoriaConnector` can be used, but this is
  only if no additional outside database is desired (writes will flow directly
  to noria)
  - NOTE: these Writer's are **entirely distinct** from the MySQL Adapter or
    Postgres Adapter. These writers are for writing to a user database that
    noria is mirroring. The adapters are used as interfaces on top of the Noria
    Client.
- **Enable RYW**: specifies if RYW consistency should be enforced, which is
  false by default. RYW consistency is currently a work in progress and this
  should be left off unless you are developing it directly. See below for more
  details.
- **Other Settings**: other settings can be set such as configuring for
  authenticated users, logging settings, and static responses.

Once the `BackendBuilder` is created, simply call `build()` on it and interact
with the Noria Client through the returned `Backend` struct.

It is important to note that the other components of the system need to be set
up separately. For example, the alternate database and the noria server must
already be running. Additionally, the reader and the writer must be created and
then passed into the `BackendBuilder`. The Noria Client itself is just a piece
that ties all these pieces together. [See this
example](../../noria-client/examples/ryw.rs).

The `Backend` is a Rust Library. There are no binaries to run the Noria Client
directly from the command line. To use the Noria Client outside of Rust, a user
needs to use an [Adapter or Native Library](../native_clients_and_adapters.md)

## Relation to Adapters and Native Libraries (MySQL Adapter, JavaScript Client)

If you want to use the Noria Client outside of a Rust project, you will want to
interact with it via an [Adapter or Native
Library.](../native_clients_and_adapters.md) These should be thought of as an
extra interface layer between the user and the Noria Client. Existing examples
include:

- **MySQL Adapter and Postgres Adapter**: allow users to interact with the noria
  client as if it was a MySQL or Postgres DB.
- **JavaScript Library**: JavaScript library that wraps the `Backend` struct
  from the Noria Client, allowing JavaScript applications to do everything with
  the Noria Client that a Rust Application could do.

## Reads

Currently, there is only one possible reader for the Noria Client, and that is
to read from noria directly, via a `ControllerHandle` and `View` handles. The
whole point of noria is its blazingly fast reads -- so of course this is pretty
simple!

## Writes

Writes are a bit more complicated, since depending on how the system is
configured, writes may be handled in different ways. A ReadySet system is
intended to be used as shown in the diagram in the main [client
page](./clients.md). Specifically, writes go to a separate database instead of
directly to noria. This is necessary because in most cases, clients of ReadySet
want to add Noria to their system without having to start using a new database.
ReadySet does not want to own client's databases. We want to place noria in
front of a database.

This presents the challenge of making sure that noria's internal base tables
stay up to date with the updates happening on the real database. This was
previously handled by the Debezium Connector, but will soon be handled by a
different bin log streaming solution. **One important point to note is that the
Noria Client is only responsible for sending writes to the database, everything
that happens downstream of that (a connector detecting changes in the binlog and
propagating them to noria) is NOT handled by the Noria Client**. Rather, that
will be handled by a separate connector.

Lastly, it is possible to configure the client to send writes directly to Noria,
but it is unlikely that our system will ever be deployed in a real setting with
this configuration.

## Read-Your-Writes (RYW) Consistency

The Noria Client is involved in enforcing RYW Consistency. For more details on
RYW Consistency, see this [design
doc](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Fs1zqj1rqjRj4JsvQf9BHQZNkUJ8cpZ7/view?usp=sharing)
and [implementation
doc.](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1oXDSCP7psTPaCAgMcXZIZOvmPjJ36VpN/view?usp=sharing)

The Noria Client abstracts the RYW mechanism away from the user. When RYW is
enabled, the user should be able to make queries via the client with no changes
from normal.

The Noria Client is essential for RYW consistency to work since it internally
manages the ticket for a user -- both attaching the ticket to reads and updating
the ticket on writes. The Noria Client will eventually interact with the
`TimestampService` and `FlightTracker` service to make this system more robust.

The `ControllerHandle` (aka noria/noria bindings) does no managing of ticket
state. These bindings simply expose the operations necessary for RYW to work --
accepting read requests with tickets attached and injecting timestamps into the
dataflow graph. The Noria Client and binlog streaming connector are responsible
for actually calling these methods and managing tickets for specific users.
